From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes.
Our weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 63. Recorded live
Thursday, April 21st, 2011. Support for Hansel
minutes is provided by Tellerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Chris cells about
writing JavaScript and HTML. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. I was up late
coding. What were you doing
this week? We've got Chris
cells talking about what it's
like to go from being
a C plus plus person
to being a JavaScript person.
Hey Chris, were you up
late coding? Well, it depends
on what you think is
late. I think I was
up early coding. I actually
went to bed about seven
30 this morning. Wow. So
you are either under a,
a schedule crunch or you
are having fun or both?
Actually. It is a combination
of both. Yes, That's fantastic.
So what are you working
on? I haven't talked to
you a lot lately and
I don't know what, I
don't know what you're doing.
So I'm working on JavaScript
and HTML tools over in
the developer division at Microsoft.
And this is a new
job for me as of
November of last year. So
I'm still relatively new. Okay.
And are you a, are
you still a program manager
where you're coming up with
features or are you writing
code now? I am a
program manager. I do come
up with features and I
am writing code. I get
to do a lot of
that. Also. I've been writing
a bunch of pros lately,
too, which has been really
great. I find the mix
of, of writing code and
then writing articles about writing
that code. I find that
a very nice mix. It
makes me happy. That's cool.
Were you a little scared
going from, I mean, you're
a, you know, old school
programmer if I may. I
mean that like compliment kind
of a way I haven't
thought of you as being
too much of a, an
HTML guy. Although I know
that we'd spend a little
bit of time working on
asp.net MVC together and you
know, you've got, you've built
your own website, you know,
you're certainly a competent HTML
guy, but I don't think
Chris sells and JavaScript to
kind of in the same
sentence. Yeah, that's the scared.
No, I, I love new
technologies. I love new challenges.
I love new things, new
adventures. I I'm happy to
do new things all the
time. I'll tell you. I
do feel like I am
climbing quite a curve that
the last time I did
any JavaScript was literally before
I did any.net. So it
was 10 years ago. I
started.net, you know, and when
it was in beta before
1.0 and have been doing
it pretty solidly in a
variety of ways since then.
And it is literally just
in the last six months
that I've done any serious
JavaScript. And I have done
a pretty decent HTML from
the server side UI composition.
I'm a big MVC fan
rewrote, my whole website a
couple of times. Right? So
I'm familiar with HTML. The
thing I was only a
little bit familiar with is
that the smallest amount of
CSS that I needed to
get by, and I just
avoided JavaScript altogether. I don't
think there's any real JavaScript
to my website. And I
have been doing pretty serious
CSS three, you know, and
we just released a CTP
of  and I've been
writing CSS and HTML five
to take care of those
advanced features in our browser.
I mean, it's been pretty
hard for, and I'll tell
ya, it's the, the thing
that has been most surprising
to me, it's amazing how
much you can do with
how little in JavaScript. I
mean, when you get done,
when you make it work,
right, the amount of JavaScript
you have to do, amazing
things is teeny tiny amounts.
So the problem I struggle
with still, and, you know,
I'm sure I will, for
awhile. It's a, it's a,
it's a thing, right? It's
a real platform. It's a
real environment that has been
growing up for like 15
years. So I shouldn't feel
so bad about, you know,
still feeling intermediate after six
months. But even though it's
a tiny little bit of
code by the time you're
done getting to what that
tiny bit of code is,
is still banging my head
against the wall a lot.
Is that idiomatic? I mean,
is it a matter of,
this is a new language
and you need to figure
out, you know, what the
most elegant and kind of
eloquent way to say something
is, or is it tooling?
What keeps you from from
quickly finding that? Is it
like starting out in Ruby
where you just have to
figure out what the right
number of characters is to
say what you want to
say clearly? So, so it's
interesting. I think that the,
I mean the language itself,
I like it's very minimal,
but I, I love what
the community has done with
it specifically over the last
five years, kind of how
they have just kind of
pushed on every nook and
cranny of JavaScript to make
it do things that it
was never meant to do.
And it's still not meant
to do, you know, the
way you use functions to
mimic, you know, private member
variables in, in simulated classes.
I mean, this is, this
is all deep boudou magic,
and it's very fun to
read that code and understand
and to kind of build
up your own kind of
library of patterns and techniques
and the way you do
things. And that's, that's fun.
I'm one of the first
things I did was I
wrote a blog post all
about this kind of set
based declarative programming model. That
kind of link really turned
beyond to in C plus
plus and in finding a,
essentially a similar set of
techniques and operators over in
the JavaScript world made me
very happy. So it's not
that I, I can't be
happy in the language. What
I'm finding is this, this
core ADM of JavaScript and
HTML and CSS of, if
you get it wrong, we're
just going to ignore that
you did anything, right? This,
this conspiracy of silence around
errors and failure drives me
crazy. Well, this is coming
from a person who wrote,
literally wrote the book on,
on WPF. And certainly as
that person, you see the
parallels between some markup, some
styling and some code except
WPF is on the other
side where it's extremely unforgiving
about having that markup and
correct. Yeah. I'd like that.
I really do. I like,
I, you know, I know
that there, there is value
in dynamic languages and I'll
tell you, I love just
being able to, to craft
data as instances on the
fly with whatever I've got,
that is a fabulous, powerful
environment to be able to
work in. So I'm really
loving it, but when it
comes to just, Oh, you
know, three layers, deep of
JavaScript, libraries and controls and
events and, and asynchronous programming
and all of this stuff.
And somewhere deep in there,
there was an error. And
we're just not going to
tell you about it. And
we're going to make you
figure that out. And that
drives me crazy. But isn't
this like the old days
where you had a debug
console open? I mean, when
I learned my first 91
line C program, that was
a hello world on windows,
you know, windows three have
like a debug console and
isn't this kind of hearkening
back to those things. Like,
they'll tell you something went
wrong. They'll just bury it
deep in debug lines. Yeah.
Except I don't know of,
I mean, the libraries I've
been using have not been
steeped in, you know, Divo
got put or exceptions, it's
mostly just swallowing those errors
and moving on and the
browser is the worst culprit.
Right. I mean, there just
is no kind of idea
of, Hey, we're going to
notice an error and tell
you about it. Do you
think that it's is, this
is something really I see
on all the browsers though,
like basically it does something,
I think it's deep, philosophical,
right? I mean, I think
fundamentally, you know, that's, the
HTML is always been very
forgiving and JavaScript has been
a language of gluing together,
a little bits of HTML
and the language itself and
the usage of the language.
And again, I'm coming new
to this world, right. But
it's been all about what
is the, the least amount
we can give you and
then get out of your
way. And in fact, you
know, I've been reading that
the, the Canon of the
books and I've been, you
know, immersing myself in the
community and trying to understand
the philosophy. And, you know,
I've attended ECMAScript standards meetings
with Brandon, Ike and Douglas
Crockford. And, you know, I
have been steeped in as
much of that as I
can possibly pram into my
head. And I think Douglas
Crockford says that the beauty
of JavaScript is you can
be productive without understanding what's
going on. And in that
kind of environment, it's gotta
be very forgiving to make
that happen. Isn't isn't that
what they said about visual
basic. So this is interesting.
This is another one of
those languages where you don't
necessarily need to know what's
going on, but if you
do, you can be like
a Ninja. Like, I mean,
when I was a VB
program, RVB three, a and
C were kind of where
I started and I would
end up combining the two,
I would do visual basic
three slash C interrupt, and
I would grab window messages
and paint icons where they
weren't supposed to be and
do all sorts of wacky
stuff. Do you think people
will do the same thing?
I remember those days, I
was mostly a visual basic
programmer. What? I think it
was four. Oh, but it
had calm. Right. And so
that's what I was deep
into calm. And we had
this idea of, you know,
visual basic as the glue
language. And plus plus is
the extensive extension language. And
every time I'd sit down
to write even the simplest
visual basic app, I could
never make it through the
whole app without saying, Oh
my God, I have to
just drop down to C
plus plus and write this
component or that component. Or
I could just write a
VB app that is very
much not my experience with
JavaScript. I could write whole
real productive apps with, with
JavaScript in the browser and,
and never need to drop
down to C plus plus.
Hmm. Do you think one
day you're going to be
itching to do that. You'll
be on you'll, you'll be
on windows and there'll be
some, you know, some calm
object that you want or
some dotnet thing you're going
to want to call. It's
interesting. The, the, the JavaScript
community has been working so
hard for so long that
they have this whole, I
mean, and of course, JavaScript
itself is the glue language
for a very extensive visual
environment, CSS, HTML, the canvas
SVG, right? These are, these
are how powerful core functionality.
And then, you know, JavaScript
has become this language for,
I mean, it started as
this little language that kind
of worked in whatever browser
you were targeting your code
at, and then the JavaScript
community, this amazing thing where
they, they use this, the
features of this language to
kind of smooth over the
cracks between the differences between
the various browsers. And then
once they did that, then
they said, great, now we
have a base and now
we can go forward with
his base of, of libraries
and techniques. And then we
can build amazing things on
top of it, like physics
engines and Sprite engines and
all of this fun stuff
for games, but then also
like validation and data access,
and you know, all of
this stuff for line of
business. And it's kind of
like, you know, with Joe
JavaScript turns the entire world
into like a MySpace programmer.
You remember my space? Yeah.
I remember they died last
week. Yeah. But I mean,
it was for a while,
there, there was this big
market for, Hey, these little
widgets, this little bits of
code that I can purchase
and, and paste on my
MySpace page. And people just
built these, you know, super
functional monstrosities in general, but
they didn't really know what
they were doing. They could
just grab these little bits
and pieces and paste them
in and make that work.
And, you know, the JavaScript
has turned the world into,
into my space programmers, which
is great because that means
that people can get all
kinds of functionality in their
websites and web applications very
quickly because, you know, I've
been learning JavaScript the same
way everyone does, which is,
Hey, how do I do
this? Well, let me, you
know, let me go to
Bing and, and figure out
what the last 15 years
of people have been doing
to solve this problem. And
it's very rare that I
can't find somebody who's done
something that the weird part
is I look at the
code and you know, it's
80. It's like, wow, this
is not progress. This programmer
was not a full time
programmer, right? This is a
programmer who is a full
time. Something else was using
JavaScript to get their job
done. And then occasionally I
stumbled across these ninjas, these
folks who are full time
programmers and who do know
this stuff deep in their
bones, and you look at
what they've come up with
and you're just in awe
of what they can do
with the environment. Hi, this
is Scott coming to you
from another place in time.
Are you using agile practices
to manage your software development?
There's lots of tools in
the market that manage the
steps of a project, but
most of them focus on
individual roles, get ready for
a solution that caters for
the success of the whole
team. Guys at Tellerik introduced
team pulse. It's an agile
project management tool. That'll help
you gather ideas, estimate plan,
track progress in a common
workspace. Finally, companies, regardless of
their size can use a
lightweight and convenient tool that
makes all the stakeholders work
as a United team. Even
if they're in different countries
by combining intuitive user interface
and the power server light
team poles removes the roadblocks
that you typically face and
applying agile in an effective
manner, no more lost data,
no disparate systems, no lack
of critical analytics regarding the
health and philosophy project. See
if yourself get a free
copy for five users in
one project at tellerik.com/team pulse.
And please do thank tolerance
for supporting Hansel minutes on
their Facebook fan page, facebook.com/t
L E R I K
Keller. We do appreciate it.
There wouldn't be a Hansel
minutes if there wasn't teller
helping us does doesn't, isn't
that the same as any
language? I mean, you're just
saying that there's a whole
lot of sample code out
there. Is it that it's
easier to copy paste and
incorporate because the, the, the
pieces are kind of more
atomic they're more compartmentalize. Actually.
It's funny. I've found that
JavaScript is exactly the opposite.
A modularization componentization composition is
harder because it's all just
one on the browser. It's
all just one big global
soup, right? Global variables. You
literally can't do anything unless
you use some level of
global variables, which is very
foreign to me as a,
you know, I've been a
component based program or forever,
and it's all about, you
know, the global state that
is not for you. You
don't to touch that. Wait
a second, though, when you,
everyone says in best practices
in JavaScript, you're supposed to
make sure that your objects
aren't enclosed space and that
they are in their own
kind of scope. Are you
saying that to do anything
significant? You have to have
global. Okay. So it's interesting.
So on the, on the
server side with no JS,
which I've also spent some
time playing with, they actually
have a module system where
it's actually a really nice
one where you're loading code
and you get to decide
is the client of the
code, but the namespaces where
you put your code. And
really, I'm sorry, on the
service side, there's really not
any global space. I mean,
it's only what you put
into your app, right? It's
only what you build up.
You get control over that
on the client side. It's
the only way you can
do that is by rod
discipline. And it doesn't matter
anyway, because anyone can reach
into any of the global
spaces and just help themselves.
Like, you know, if I
wanted to have my code
run, right. Somebody who included
my elaborate. And I just
want to go up to
all of the built in
types and add all my
own functions, because I think
those are cool. I can
do that in JavaScript. And
in fact, that's how, that's
how most of these, a
lot of these libraries work,
right? I mean, jQuery very
popular library works by adding
operators in the global space.
Yeah. But aren't, they special?
They're not special. It turns
out jQuery is just like
any other library. And in
fact, what that means then
is that some of these
libraries step on each other,
right. If they try to
do the same things to
the same types in slightly
different ways, and they start
stepping on each other and
there's not a whole lot,
you can really do about
that except not use that
code. That seems to be
a recurring theme in JavaScript.
At least in my experience
is that best practices are
often based on willpower and
awareness of certain idioms is
that, is that different or
looser is, is JavaScript, sloppier
than other languages that it
requires people to know what
the current best practices or
are all languages like that.
Well, it's interesting. So if
you're building a library for
JavaScript, you have to really
want to do to keep
yourself isolated from the user
edits. It's so easy to
just say, you know what,
the Dawn's right there. I
can just reach over into
this space and just get
this little piece of information
I need. And I don't
have to ask anyone for
it. Oh, and I can
make their lives a little
easier. I can put this
here and that there, and
it'll just make their lives
easier. And then suddenly, you
know, you've turned it into
your world and then they're
just living in it. But
if you're an application is
nice not to have to
go through the ceremony that
you have to write, you
don't have to have classes.
You don't have to have
namespaces, you can just write
your code and it will
do largely what you expect.
And if you, if you
want to impose, you know,
a little bit of discipline,
you're allowed to turn the
dial up and down as
much as you want. And
from an application developer standpoint,
that's a very nice dial
to be able to turn
in a lot of languages.
And actually.net is like this.
You are pretty much writing
libraries, even when you're writing
applications. So you're going through
all of the same disciplines
just to get your code
to, to execute and plug
into the libraries and the
frameworks you're using. You're using
all those same disciplines, whether
you want to or not.
It's just, it's imposed on
you by the environment. But
with JavaScript, you can be
very sloppy and get very
far, very fast when you're
writing apps. And that's nice.
So that's, that's very interesting
though, because I recently did
some JavaScript. That was a,
a little specific, it was
for the mixed keynote. And
I wanted some JavaScript that
would add jump lists for
the podcast in I nine.
So it was actually a
browser specific and platform specific
thing. It would only work
on INI and it would
only work on windows. And
I wanted some buttons so
that when you hover over
the task bar, you could
push play, and then you
could actually play the podcast.
So it would be a
podcast player without using a
plugin. And That was a
lovely talk. It was like
20 lines of JavaScript. It
was ridiculous. It was. So
It is, it is amazing
how far you can get
how fast. Yeah. But then
I showed it to a
real JavaScript program. Dave ward
and Dave ward said, no,
no, no, no, no, no.
This has to be a
J Cray plugin. So then
we did a screen sharing
and my 40 lines of
JavaScript became 90 lines of
JavaScript, you know, with a
framework to make it a
jQuery plugin, which only which
made it better. Like it
felt more componentized and it
felt tinier. And I could
move it out of inline
because apparently JavaScript programmers, don't
like their script in their
markup that they think that's
really bad. You have to
have your script unobtrusive. So
it made my script unobtrusive.
Well, I mean, you have
to qualify who you're talking
about. Right. I mean, you
can't just say a JavaScript
programmer. Well, good. I mean,
again, define good. I mean
the C plus plus programmers,
you know, it's hard for
those people to not be
computer science. Right. But programmers,
right. They can have real
lives and still be productive
in JavaScript. And that's the
thing. Okay. Well then that,
that means that the world
is going to be split
between JavaScript, connoisseurs and JavaScript
core Mons. In fact, I
would argue that's actually true.
And I don't know what
the statistics are, but in
terms of penetration, I mean,
that browser is everywhere. So
JavaScript is just everywhere. That's,
that's the thing too. Hmm.
Well, so I, I was
excited to learn how to
make a jQuery plugin, but
also disappointed that it was
entirely convention based like someone
wrote the prototype, no pun
intended years ago, and now
we all have to do
it that way because that
guy said so Sure. And
that's the way a jQuery
plugins work. And, you know,
John Rez had guts to
decide, right. When he built
jQuery, jQuery, plugins w looked
like and worked like, but
of course there's nothing stopping
those jQuery plugins to do
their thing and Oh, so
much more. Right. Right. Exactly.
I mean, there really are
on the client side, in
the browser, no boundaries with
JavaScript and that causes problems
obviously. So do you see
yourself in the future writing
JavaScript and HTML and XAML
and SAML styles, or have
you, have you done what
you needed to do in
XAML and now you're kind
of exploring new space just
because you're bored. I am
very much, I'm exploring this
new space. I still have
these moments where I'm writing,
you know, a program to
run my life, right. I'm
writing a program to scrape
data from mint.com and throw
it into a, a database
so that I can do
data analysis on it. Right.
Or I'm writing some tool
that munches actually, I wrote
a tool the other day
that that builds, took a,
a visual studio project and
did a bunch of kind
of analysis on it and
turned it into a visual
studio template. These are the
kinds of things that I
still fall back on C
sharp for, because I love
C sharp. I absolutely do,
but that is happening less
and less and more and
more I'm writing my, my
day to day programs. My
things that I actually care
about in an HTML and
JavaScript and CSS, and my
goal is to be pure,
to do everything. In fact,
I've spent a bunch of
time thinking about and trying
to find a real JavaScript
shell. I've tried half a
dozen times with power script
and never gotten very far,
but I would really love
it if I was a
JavaScript. Where do you do
most of your writing? And
I think one of the
interesting things that came up
during the mixed keynote was
it is unclear to the
public, what everyone is writing
these things in. I mean,
there were a lot of
cool  demos. I nine,
nine, 10 demos, but it
was unclear what they were
writing them in. If they're
writing the note pad or
in visual studio or in
some magic thing we don't
know about what do you
do your work in? I,
I, you know, no pad
is fine for reading and
making public edits, but day
in, day out, I write
HTML in markup CSS in
markup and JavaScript. And I
do it all in visual
studio. Hmm. So do you
use the J script extensions
for visual studio? The extension
manager extensions that have been
released? Oh, I saw those
goodbye. I haven't actually, I
haven't used them. Are they
good? Should I use them?
The word on the street
is that the J script
extensions were features that were
going to go in the
next version of visual studio
that they got able to
put into a plugin. So
it adds like bracket matching
and smarter IntelliSense and just
have a whole pile of
goodness. So yes. Word on
the street is it's much,
much better. It's like getting
a newer version of visual
studio as far as the
JavaScript is concerned. That's cool.
I should check that out.
Yeah. Yeah. And it's all
packaged up as an extension,
so you should check that
out. That's the fun, the
thing that I find is
super handy is, you know,
the thing that makes all
dynamic languages wonderful. Right. I
can just stop by program
wherever I want to, and
just start exploring the environment
I find myself in, and
then I can write my
programs based on that. It
is amazing how much of
my program I write that
way. Hmm. That's impressive. That's
impressive. So you think that
that JavaScript is going to
be good for Microsoft? Wow.
You know, that is right.
I mean, you know, you,
even for gosh, for a
couple of years now, it
seems like a Steve snob
ski and, and everyone on
down has really been banging
the HTML five and CSS
and JavaScript Thrones. And that's
kind of interesting. That's very
interesting because you know, it's,
it's a, it's a cross
platform. I mean, it's w
it's what Java was meant
to be, Right? Yeah, exactly.
JavaScript is a job was
meant to be, and if
you, if you do it
right then theoretically, you don't
need windows. Yeah. And that's
the interesting thing. So it's,
it's interesting to think about,
well, gosh, I can just
write my programs and have
it run anywhere. And of
course the ubiquity of the
browser, it's not even just
PCs, right. It's devices, it's
tablets, it's a toaster ovens,
right. I mean, it's, it's
everywhere. It's crazy. It is.
It is very, truly the,
the thing that Java was
meant to be, I never
came close to being on
the other hand, you think
about, well, what's the business
model for, for Microsoft? I
mean, we absolutely are. You
can see an  and
it, and I don't know
if you've seen the reviews
go by for . It's
been amazing. Actually. I'm very
happy. I'm, I'm closely associated
with that team. And that
always makes me happy to
see them successful and to
see us successful there. But
it seems like the goal
is to really make windows
the best platform you could
imagine for, for running websites,
right. This idea of, you
know, native websites and integrating
websites directly into this shell.
So they look and feel
like applications like any other
kind of application. This is
pretty, I mean, it makes
me happy as a windows
user to have those kinds
of functionalities built in and
don't have,  be just
a, a kick ass browser.
Makes me happy too. Yup.
We've got to catch up
though. It seems to me
we're a little behind that
there's a whole world of
JavaScript people out there that
don't even care that we're
out here. So it's, it's,
it's very interesting. Really. I
E eight was kind of
a, Hey, we're still here.
Don't forget about us. Kind
of stop gap and arginine,
you know, seems to be
the first real browser we've
done in a long time,
and we're still dealing with
the mess we created with
six. Right. Exactly. Cool. Well,
thanks so much for talking
to me today, Chris. It's,
it's good to know that
that sells is doing JavaScript
now. So we should, we
should check it out. Hey,
it's my pleasure. Happy to
do it. Alright. Well, thanks.
And also, thanks for staying
up till seven in the
morning, working on it, whatever
you're doing Well, I'll be
able to share what I've
been saying up until seven
in the morning. Doing Cool.
I'll talk to you soon.
Yep. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.